By Bruce Russett. Published in Scientific American in 1993. Avision of peace among democratically governed nation-states has long been invoked as part of a configuration of institutions and practices that reduce war. In 1795 Immanuel Kant spoke of perpetual peace based in part on states that shared “republican constitutions.” Woodrow Wilson expressed the same conviction in his 1917 war message to Congress when he asserted that “a steadfast concert of peace can never be maintained except by a partnership of democratic nations.” This vision once sounded utopian. But now, at the end of the 20th century, it is newly plausible. The research of social scientists points to an irrefutable and tantalizing observation: stable democracies are unlikely to engage in military disputes with one another or to let any such conflicts escalate into war. In fact, they rarely even skirmish. Democracies are more likely to accept third-party mediation, to reciprocate one another’s behavior and to settle their disputes peacefully. At the same time, they are about as prone to violence in their relations with authoritarian states as authoritarian states are toward one another. In the modern world, a “democracy” means a country in which nearly everyone can vote, elections are freely contested and the chief executive is chosen by popular vote or by an elected parliament. The more democratic a nation is, the more peaceful its relations with other democracies are likely to be. Since 1946, pairs of democratic states have been only one eighth as likely as other kinds of states to threaten to use force against each other and only one tenth as likely actually to do so. Established democracies fought no wars against one another during the entire 20th century. ( Although Finland, for example, took the Axis side against the Soviet Union in World War II, it nevertheless engaged in no combat with the democracies.) Moreover, the fairly tranquil relations among democracies are not spuriously caused by some other shared influence such as high levels of wealth or rapid growth or ties of alliance. Peace reigns among democracies even when these other favorable conditions do not apply. These peaceful relations are not limited just to the rich industrialized countries or to NATO members. During the cold war, the phenomenon was not maintained simply by pressure from a common adversary, and it is outlasting that threat. Peace among democracies derives in part from cultural restraints on conflict, primarily from the belief that it would be wrong to fight another democracy. This view extends into the international arena the norms of live-and-let-live and peaceful resolution of conflict that operate within democracies. Institutional constraints also play an important role: it is a complicated procedure to persuade the people, the legislature and other independent institutions that war is necessary. Consequently, in a dispute with a democracy another nation can expect that there will be ample time for conflict-resolution processes to be e›ective and virtually no risk of incurring surprise attack. Evidence supports both the cultural and the institutional explanations; they reinforce each other. The cultural explanation may be somewhat more powerful, however. A culture of democracy, manifested in the absence of violence in domestic politics and the duration of stable democratic regimes, seems to exert a somewhat stronger influence on peace among democracies than do particular institutional constraints. Nonindustrial societies, studied by ethnographers and anthropologists, also show less war among democratically organized polities. These units lack the institutional constraints of a modern state. Nevertheless, groups that are organized democratically fight one another significantly less often than do groups that have more authoritarian rule. The relation between democracy and peace is weaker and less consistent in preindustrial societies than in the modern international system, but to find it there at all shows that the pattern of peace among democracies is not limited to contemporary Western countries. The more democracies there are in the world, the fewer potential adversaries the U.S. and other democratic nations will have and the wider the zone of peace will spread. The emergence of new democracies with the end of the cold war presents a chance for change in international relations more fundamental even than the opportunities created by the end of the Napoleonic Wars and World Wars I and II. Freedom House, a New York City–based research organization, has for more than 20 years graded countries by their types of political systems. At the end of 1991, for the first time ever, close to a majority of states (91 of 183) approximated reasonable standards employed for judging whether or not a country is a democracy; another 35 were in some form of transition to democracy. The real possibility for widespread peace provides a compelling reason to strengthen democracy in the successor states of the former Soviet Union. There is no massive American Marshall Plan, and outside influence will be limited in any case. Yet a favorable international environment can make a di›erence. Western states can o›er some economic help. International organizations can promote human rights and democracy. Successful transitions to democracy in some countries can supply a model for others. A stable and less menacing international political environment can assist the emergence and consolidation of democratic governments. Democracy in many of these nationstates may not prove stable. This global wave of democratization may crest and fall back, as earlier ones have done. But states probably can become democratic faster than they can become rich. The cold war policy of containment succeeded. The chance for wide democratization now offers a new policy of building democratic peace. If it can be grasped and consolidated, world politics might be transformed.